Coding conventions==================This section summarizes coding conventions for the GammaLib development.C++ classes-----------General rules^^^^^^^^^^^^^Each class should be defined in a pair of individual files:-  a header file that defines the class interface   (with filename suffix ``.hpp``)-  a source code file that implements the class   (with filename suffix ``.cpp``)In addition, a SWIG interface file should be provided for the Pythonbindings (with filename suffix ``.i``).Each file should contain the ``#include`` directives that are necessary forcompilation of the specific file. ``#include`` directives that are specifiedin the header file can be omitted in the source code file, provided thatthe header file is included in the source code file.The C++ style header files should be used instead of the C style headerfiles to ensure maximum portability. The following table provides thecorrespondence between C++ and C header files for headers commonly usedin GammaLib:============= ============== =================C++           C              Function examples============= ============== =================``<cctype>``                 ``<cmath>``   ``<math.h>``   ``std::abs``, ``std::cos````<cfloat>``                 ``<cstdio>``  ``<stdio.h>``  ``std::fopen``, ``std::fgets``, ``std::fclose``, ``std::fprintf``, ``std::sprintf````<cstdlib>``                ``<cstring>`` ``<string.h>`` ``std::strlen``============= ============== =================Note that functions and types should be prefixed by ``std::``. For example,``cos`` becomes ``std::cos``, ``time_t`` becomes ``std::time_t``, etc. One significantchange between C and C++ is that ``fabs`` becomes ``std::abs`` since the C style``abs`` function only applies to integers. Here, the ``std::`` prefix is crucialto distinguish the C++ function (which is also defined for doubles) fromthe C function... _sec_header:Header file structure^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^The header file defines the interface of the class. Here is an exampleof a header file... code-block:: cpp    /***************************************************************************     *                        GClass.hpp  -  My nice class                     *     * ----------------------------------------------------------------------- *     *  copyright (C) 2010-2013 by Juergen Knoedlseder                         *     * ----------------------------------------------------------------------- *     *                                                                         *     *  This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify   *     *  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by   *     *  the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or      *     *  (at your option) any later version.                                    *     *                                                                         *     *  This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,        *     *  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of         *     *  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the          *     *  GNU General Public License for more details.                           *     *                                                                         *     *  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License      *     *  along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.  *     *                                                                         *     ***************************************************************************/    /**     * @file GClass.hpp     * @brief Definition of my nice class interface     * @author Juergen Knoedlseder     */    #ifndef GCLASS_HPP    #define GCLASS_HPP    /* __ Includes ___________________________________________________________ */    #include <string>    #include "GBase.hpp"    /***********************************************************************//**     * @class GClass     *     * @brief Illustration of a GammaLib class     *     * My nice class illustrates how a GammaLib class should be defined.     ***************************************************************************/    class GClass : public GBase {    public:        // Constructors and destructors        GClass(void);        GClass(const GClass& c);        virtual ~GClass(void);             // Operators        GClass& operator= (const GClass& c);        // Methods        void        clear(void);        GClass*     clone(void) const;        std::string print(void) const;          protected:        // Protected methods        void init_members(void);        void copy_members(const GClass& c);        void free_members(void);        // Protected data members        std::string     m_name;          //!< Name    };    #endif /* GCLASS_HPP */The header file starts with a comment containing the file name and classpurpose, the copyright information and the license text. The years inthe copyright information should cover the years over which the file hasbeen modified, the author is the person who initially created the file.Following the header comment is a comment that provides file informationto the Doxygen documentation system.The subsequent.. code-block:: cpp        #ifndef GCLASS_HPP        #define GCLASS_HPPdeclarations together with the.. code-block:: cpp        #endif /* GCLASS_HPP */declaration at the end protect the file from multiple inclusions of theheader. This is a crucial feature needed for proper compilation of thecode.Now all header files are included. Standard header files are includedusing the ``< >`` brackets, GammaLib header files are included using ``" "``. A80 character long separator precedes the header inclusion. Further 80character long separators may be added for additional sections, such asconstants, type definitions, forward declarations, etc. Use oneseparator to precede each additional section.The class definition is preceded by a comment block that will be used bythe Doxygen system to extract the class definition. Provide here theclass name, a brief one line description of the class, and an extendeddetailed description of the class purpose.The class definition is structured in several sections:- Definition of public constructors- Definition of public operators- Definition of public methods- Definition of protected methods- Definition of protected membersNote tha most classes will derive from the abstract interface class``GBase`` which imposes the implementation of the ``clear()``, the``clone()`` and the ``print()`` methods.The definition of pure virtual methods should be done in a section thatis separate from the methods that are implemented.Here an illustration of the expected structure, based on the``GObservation`` class:.. code-block:: cpp    class GObservation : public GBase {    public:        // Constructors and destructors        GObservation(void);        GObservation(const GObservation& obs);        virtual ~GObservation(void);        // Operators        virtual GObservation& operator= (const GObservation& obs);        // Pure virtual methods        virtual void          clear(void) = 0;        virtual GObservation* clone(void) const = 0;        virtual std::string   print(const GChatter& chatter = NORMAL) const = 0;        // Virtual methods        virtual double        model(const GModels& models, const GEvent& event, GVector* gradient = NULL) const;        virtual double        npred(const GModels& models, GVector* gradient = NULL) const;        // Implemented methods        void                  name(const std::string& name);        void                  id(const std::string& id);    protected:        // Protected methods        void init_members(void);        void copy_members(const GObservation& obs);        void free_members(void);        // Protected data area        std::string m_name;         //!< Name of observation        std::string m_id;           //!< Observation identifier        std::string m_statistics;   //!< Optimizer statistics (default=poisson)        GEvents*    m_events;       //!< Pointer to event container    };.. _sec_sourcecode:Source code file structure^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^The source code file implements the code of the class. Here is anexample of the start of a source code file... code-block:: cpp    /***************************************************************************     *                        GClass.cpp  -  My nice class                     *     * ----------------------------------------------------------------------- *     *  copyright (C) 2010-2013 by Juergen Knoedlseder                         *     * ----------------------------------------------------------------------- *     *                                                                         *     *  This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify   *     *  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by   *     *  the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or      *     *  (at your option) any later version.                                    *     *                                                                         *     *  This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,        *     *  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of         *     *  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the          *     *  GNU General Public License for more details.                           *     *                                                                         *     *  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License      *     *  along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.  *     *                                                                         *     ***************************************************************************/    /**     * @file GClass.cpp     * @brief Implementation of my nice class     * @author Juergen Knoedlseder     */    /* __ Includes ___________________________________________________________ */    #ifdef HAVE_CONFIG_H    #include <config.h>    #endif    #include "GClass.hpp"    #include "GTools.hpp"    /* __ Method name definitions ____________________________________________ */    #define G_CLEAR                                             "GClass::clear()"    #define G_CLONE                                       "GClass::clone() const"    #define G_PRINT                                       "GClass::print() const"    /* __ Compile options ____________________________________________________ */    #define G_USE_MY_OPTION    /* __ Debug options ______________________________________________________ */    #define G_DEBUG_PRINT    /* __ Constants __________________________________________________________ */    const double pi = 3.14;The include section starts with a conditional include of the codeconfiguration header file (see :ref:`sec_configure`). This makesGammaLib compile options available to the source code.The include section is followed by the declaration of method names.These method names will be used in exceptions (see :ref:`sec_exceptions`).Define the method names at the top of the file easesthe maintainability of the code, as changes in method names orinterfaces need only to be implemented in a single place. Method namesneed only be defined for methods throwing exceptions.Compile options are used to control which parts of the code should becompiled. Such options may be used, for example, to compare differentalgorithms or computation methods. They can also be used duringdevelopment, allowing an easy switch between the new and the old codefor comparison.Debug options are compile options that are used to add additional codefor debugging. Often, these are print statements that allow to trace theexecution of the code. For code checked into the repository, all debugoptions should be commented out... _sec_python:Python interface for C++ classes--------------------------------The Python interface for C++ classes is defined by a so-called `SWIG <http://www.swig.org/>`_interface file. SWIG uses these interface files to build Python wrapperfiles, which are C files that define the interface between GammaLib andPython. The structure of the SWIG interface file follows closely that ofthe header file, with a few exceptions. Here an example:.. code-block:: cpp    /***************************************************************************     *                         GClass.i  -  My nice class                      *     * ----------------------------------------------------------------------- *     *  copyright (C) 2010-2012 by Juergen Knoedlseder                         *     * ----------------------------------------------------------------------- *     *                                                                         *     *  This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify   *     *  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by   *     *  the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or      *     *  (at your option) any later version.                                    *     *                                                                         *     *  This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,        *     *  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of         *     *  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the          *     *  GNU General Public License for more details.                           *     *                                                                         *     *  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License      *     *  along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.  *     *                                                                         *     ***************************************************************************/    /**     * @file GClass.i     * @brief Python interface of my nice class     * @author Juergen Knoedlseder     */    %{    /* Put headers and other declarations here that are needed for compilation */    #include "GClass.hpp"    #include "GTools.hpp"    %}    /***********************************************************************//**     * @class GClass     *     * @brief Illustration of a GammaLib class     *     * My nice class illustrates how a GammaLib class should be defined.     ***************************************************************************/    class GClass : public GBase {    public:        // Constructors and destructors        GClass(void);        GClass(const GClass& c);        virtual ~GClass(void);        // Methods        void        clear(void);        GClass*     clone(void) const;    };    /***********************************************************************//**     * @brief GClass class extension     ***************************************************************************/    %extend GClass {        GClass copy() {            return (*self);        }    };The code starts with a section that is enclosed in ``%{ %}`` brackets. Inthis section, all header files are specified that are needed to compilethe SWIG wrapper file.Then follows the class definition, with the following differences withrespect to the definition in the header file:-  it does not include the assignment operator-  it does not include any access operator (these have to be implemented   specifically, see below)-  it does not include the ``print()`` method (see below)-  it does not include protected or private membersFinally, there is a section with extension to the C++ class. Here,methods are implemented that do not exist in the actual C++ class, butthat will exist in the Python interface.In case that an access operator needs to be implemented, the``__getitem__()`` and ``__setitem__()`` methods need to be added to theclass extensions.