.. _1.7:

GammaLib 1.7 release
====================

Overview
--------

GammaLib 1.7 is a major release that adds significant functionality.

In particular, this release provides:

* Support for INTEGRAL/SPI data analysis
* Response caching for all instruments
* A radial ring as new spatial model
* A spectral table as new spectral model


Bug fixes
---------

* [`3199 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/3199>`_] -
  Fix ambiguity problem in ``GSkyDir::posang()`` and ``GSkyDir::posang_deg()``.
* [`3179 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/3179>`_] -
  Fix ``GModelSpatialDiffuseCube`` pickeling issue.
* [`3126 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/3126>`_] -
  Avoid rounding errors in ``GSkyMap`` operators.
* [`3012 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/3012>`_] -
  Exclude upper edge boundary in ``GSkyMap::contains()`` method.
* [`2917 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/2917>`_] -
  Fix ``GTime.utc()`` precision bug.
* Correctly write model attributes in ``GCOMModelDRBFitting`` class.


Improvements
------------

* Add equality and non-equality operators to ``GSkyRegionCircle`` class.
* [`3202 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/3202>`_] -
  Replace ``GCTAResponseCache`` class by ``GResponseCache`` class.
* [`3145 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/3145>`_] -
  Properly set region for ``GModelSpatialDiffuseCube`` class.
* [`3062 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/3062>`_] -
  Add ``GObservations::npred()`` methods.
* [`2990 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/2990>`_] -
  Add ``GSkyMap::extract()`` methods.
* [`2973 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/2973>`_] -
  Improve COMPTEL classes.
  Implement methods to remove models from a response cache.
  Add ``GCOMObservation::drm(GModels&)`` method.
  Add ``GCOMDri::cone_content()`` method.
* [`2971 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/2971>`_] -
  Install example binaries in share/examples folder.
* [`2961 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/2961>`_] -
  Add ``GModelSpatial::flux()`` method.
* Add ``GGti::overlap()`` method.
* [`2909 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/2909>`_] -
  Add ``GTime.datetime()`` method and add optional precision to ``GTime.utc()`` method.
* [`2881 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/2881>`_] -
  Replace ``log`` flag by ``string`` in ``GEbounds`` and ``GEnergies`` classes.
* [`2695 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/2695>`_] -
  Allow RoI centres different from pointing direction in unbinned analysis.
* [`1855 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/1855>`_] -
  Add ``GSkyDir::moon()`` method.
* [`1854 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/1854>`_] -
  Add ``GSkyDir::sun()``, ``GSkyDir::precess()`` and ``GTime::julian_epoch()`` methods.


New features
------------

* [`3253 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/3253>`_] -
  Add ``GModelSpatialRadialRing`` class.
* [`3072 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/3072>`_] -
  Fix inverted min-max boundary in ``GOptimizePar`` for negative scale factors.
* [`2961 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/2961>`_] -
  Change order of Python module import.
* [`733 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/733>`_]
  [`734 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/734>`_]
  [`735 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/735>`_]
  [`736 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/736>`_]
  [`740 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/740>`_]
  [`742 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/742>`_]
  [`745 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/745>`_]
  [`746 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/746>`_] -
  Implement INTEGRAL/SPI instrument interface.
* [`742 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/742>`_] -
  Implement ``GSPIResponse`` class.
* [`599 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/599>`_] -
  Add ``GModelSpectralTable`` class.


Clean up
--------

* [`3179 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/3179>`_] -
  Rename ``GModelSpatialDiffuseCube::set_mc_cone()`` to ``GModelSpatialDiffuseCube::mc_cone()`` and add ``mc_cone()`` getter methods.
* [`3179 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/3179>`_] -
  Rename ``GModelSpatialDiffuseMap::set_mc_cone()`` to ``GModelSpatialDiffuseMap::mc_cone()`` and add ``mc_cone()`` getter methods.
* [`2893 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/2893>`_] -
  Remove ``GCTAResponseCache::ndirs()``, ``GCTAResponseCache::nerecos()`` and ``GCTAResponseCache::netrues()`` methods.
* [`1829 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/1829>`_] -
  ``GSkyProjection::coordsys()`` method now returns ``CEL`` instead of ``EQU``.
* [`1761 <https://cta-redmine.irap.omp.eu/issues/1761>`_] -
  Remove ``GModelSpatialDiffuseCube::maps()`` and ``GModelSpatialDiffuseCube::pixels()`` methods.
